=head1 NAME

rrdflush - Flush the values for a spcific RRD file from memory.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rrdtool> B<flush> I<filename>
S<[B<--daemon> I<address>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<flush> function connects to L<rrdcached>, the RRD caching daemon, and
issues a "flush" command for the given file. The daemon will put this file to
the head of the update queue so it is written "soon". The status will be
returned after the node has been B<dequeued> by the update thread. By the time
execution of this command ends it is very likely that the update thread has
just updated the requested file, though this is not guaranteed.

=over 8

=item I<filename>

The name of the B<RRD> that is to be written to disk.

=item B<--daemon> I<address>

Address of the L<rrdcached> daemon. If not specified, the RRDCACHED_ADDRESS
environment variable must be set (see below). To specify a UNIX domain socket
use the prefix C<unix:>, see example below. Other addresses are interpreted as
normal network addresses, i.E<nbsp>e. IPv4 or IPv6 addresses in most cases.

 rrdtool flush --daemon unix:/var/run/rrdcached.sock /var/lib/rrd/foo.rrd

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

The following environment variables may be used to change the behavior of
C<rrdtoolE<nbsp>flush>:

=over 4

=item B<RRDCACHED_ADDRESS>

If this environment variable is set it will have the same effect as specifying
the C<--daemon> option on the command line. If both are present, the command
line argument takes precedence.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Florian Forster E<lt>octoE<nbsp>atE<nbsp>verplant.orgE<gt>

