=head1 NAME

rrdgraph_examples - Examples for rrdtool graph

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rrdtool graph /home/httpd/html/test.png --img-format PNG \>

followed by any of the examples below

=head1 DESCRIPTION

For your convenience some of the commands are explained here
by using detailed examples. They are not always cut-and-paste
ready because comments are intermixed with the examples.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Data with multiple resolutions

    --end now --start end-120000s --width 400
    DEF:ds0a=/home/rrdtool/data/router1.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE
    DEF:ds0b=/home/rrdtool/data/router1.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE:step=1800
    DEF:ds0c=/home/rrdtool/data/router1.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE:step=7200
    LINE1:ds0a#0000FF:"default resolution\n"
    LINE1:ds0b#00CCFF:"resolution 1800 seconds per interval\n"
    LINE1:ds0c#FF00FF:"resolution 7200 seconds per interval\n"

=head2 Nicely formatted legend section

    DEF:ds0=/home/rrdtool/data/router1.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE
    DEF:ds1=/home/rrdtool/data/router1.rrd:ds1:AVERAGE
    VDEF:ds0max=ds0,MAXIMUM
    VDEF:ds0avg=ds0,AVERAGE
    VDEF:ds0min=ds0,MINIMUM
    VDEF:ds0pct=ds0,95,PERCENT
    VDEF:ds1max=ds1,MAXIMUM
    VDEF:ds1avg=ds1,AVERAGE
    VDEF:ds1min=ds1,MINIMUM
    VDEF:ds1pct=ds1,95,PERCENT

Note: consolidation occurs here.

    CDEF:ds0bits=ds0,8,*
    CDEF:ds1bits=ds1,8,*

Note: 10 spaces to move text to the right

    COMMENT:"          "

Note: the column titles have to be as wide as the columns

    COMMENT:"Maximum    "
    COMMENT:"Average    "
    COMMENT:"Minimum    "

Note: some lines contains the new-line character "\n"

    COMMENT:"95th percentile\n"
    AREA:ds0bits#00C000:"Inbound "
    GPRINT:ds0max:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds0avg:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds0min:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds0pct:"%6.2lf %Sbps\n"
    LINE1:ds1bits#0000FF:"Outbound"
    GPRINT:ds1max:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds1avg:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds1min:"%6.2lf %Sbps"
    GPRINT:ds1pct:"%6.2lf %Sbps\n"

=head2 Offsetting a line on the y-axis

Depending on your needs you can do this in two ways:

=over 4

=item *

Offset the data, then graph this

    DEF:mydata=my.rrd:ds:AVERAGE

Note: this will also influence any other command that uses "data"

    CDEF:data=mydata,100,+
    LINE1:data#FF0000:"Data with offset"

=item *

Graph the original data, with an offset

    DEF:mydata=my.rrd:ds:AVERAGE

Note: no color in the first line so it is not visible

    LINE1:100

Note: the second line gets stacked on top of the first one

    LINE1:data#FF0000:"Data with offset":STACK

=back

=head2 Time ranges

    Last four weeks: --start end-4w --end 00:00
    January 2001:    --start 200101010000 --end start+31d
    January 2001:    --start 200101010000 --end 200102010000
    Last hour:       --start end-1h
    Last 24 hours:   <nothing at all>
    Yesterday:       --end 00:00

=head2 Viewing the current and previous week together

    --end now --start end-1w
    DEF:thisweek=router.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE
    DEF:lastweek=router.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE:end=now-1w:start=end-1w

Shift the data forward by one week (604800 seconds)

    SHIFT:lastweek:604800
    [ more of the usual VDEF and CDEF stuff if you like ]
    AREA:lastweek#0000FF:Last\ week
    LINE1:thisweek#FF0000:This\ week

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<rrdgraph> gives an overview of how B<rrdtool graph> works.
L<rrdgraph_data> describes B<DEF>,B<CDEF> and B<VDEF> in detail.
L<rrdgraph_rpn> describes the B<RPN> language used in the B<?DEF> statements.
L<rrdgraph_graph> page describes all the graph and print functions.

Make sure to read L<rrdgraph_examples> for tipsE<amp>tricks.

=head1 AUTHOR

Program by Tobias Oetiker E<lt>oetiker@ee.ethz.chE<gt>

This manual page by Alex van den Bogaerdt E<lt>alex@ergens.op.het.netE<gt>
