=head1 NAME

rrdlist - List directories and rrd databases.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rrdtool> B<list>
S<[B<--daemon>|B<-d> I<address>]>
S<[B<--noflush>|B<-F>]>
S<[B<--recursive>|B<-r>]>
I<path>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<list> function provides an 'ls-like' interface for traversing and listing
the rrd database tree.

When using the B<--daemon> option, the B<list> function connects to
L<rrdcached>, the RRD caching daemon, and issues a "list" command for the given
path.

=over 8

=item I<path>

The path (starting with '/') with '/' being the rrdcached base_dir.

=item B<--daemon>|B<-d> I<address>

Address of the L<rrdcached> daemon. If not specified, the
RRDCACHED_ADDRESS environment variable must be set (see below).  For a
list of accepted formats, see the B<-l> option in the L<rrdcached>
manual.

 rrdtool list --daemon 127.0.0.1:42218 /cluster/nodes/node1

=item B<--noflush>|B<-F>

When using a daemon, C<rrdtoolE<nbsp>list> will usually flush its cache to the
disk before performing operations. This option disables cache flushing.

=item B<--recursive>|B<-r>

Make the list of rrd databases recursive.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

The following environment variables may be used to change the behavior of
C<rrdtoolE<nbsp>list>:

=over 4

=item B<RRDCACHED_ADDRESS>

If this environment variable is set it will have the same effect as specifying
the C<--daemon> option on the command line. If both are present, the command
line argument takes precedence.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Sebastien Dugue <sebastien.dugue@atos.net>
