=head1 NAME

rrdlast - Return the date of the last data sample in an RRD

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rrdtool> B<last> I<filename>
S<[B<--daemon> I<address>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<last> function returns the UNIX timestamp of the most recent
update of the RRD.

=over 8

=item I<filename>

The name of the B<RRD> that contains the data.

=item B<--daemon> I<address>

Address of the L<rrdcached> daemon. If specified, a C<flush> command is sent
to the server before reading the RRD files. This allows B<rrdtool> to return
fresh data even if the daemon is configured to cache values for a long time.
For a list of accepted formats, see the B<-l> option in the L<rrdcached> manual.

 rrdtool last --daemon unix:/var/run/rrdcached.sock /var/lib/rrd/foo.rrd

=item B<--noflush> 

If the L<rrdcached> daemon is being used, then omit the flush normally 
send before returning the last update.  If you add this option, you get the 
last time the file on disk was updated; if you have relatively low cache times
and are calling this frequently it will preserve the caching benefit

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

The following environment variables may be used to change the behavior of
C<rrdtoolE<nbsp>last>:

=over 4

=item B<RRDCACHED_ADDRESS>

If this environment variable is set it will have the same effect as specifying
the C<--daemon> option on the command line. If both are present, the command
line argument takes precedence.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Wright <rwwright@home.com>
Daemon support added by Steve Shipway <steve@steveshipway.org>


