=head1 NAME

rrdtool graph - Round Robin Database tool grapher functions

WARNING: This is for version 1.1.x which is B<I<BETA>> software.
The software may contain serious bugs. Some of the items
described in here may not yet exist (although this should
be mentioned) or still be in the alpha stage.  As with every
other RRDtool release: use at your own risk.  In contrast with
the stable version of RRDtool, this release may contain bugs
known to the authors.  It is highly recommended that you subscribe
to the mailing list.

=head1 SYNOPSYS

B<DEF>:I<vname>=I<RRD file>:I<ds name>:I<CF>[:[I<time range>][:I<step size>]]

B<VDEF>:I<vname>=I<RPN expression>

B<CDEF>:I<vname>=I<RPN expression>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These three instructions collect the data out of the B<RRD> files,
optionally altering it (think of a bytes to bits conversion) and
if desired you can define variables containing useful information
such as maximum, mininimum etcetera. Two of the instructions use
a language called B<RPN> which is described in its own manual page.

=head1 DEF

B<DEF>:I<vname>=I<RRD file>:I<ds name>:I<CF>[:[I<time range>][:I<step size>]]

This command fetches data from an B<RRD> file.  The virtual name
I<vname> can then be used throughout the rest of the script. By
default, an B<RRA> which contains the correct consolidated data
at an appropriate resolution will be chosen.  The resolution can
be overriden with the L<--step|rrdgraph/item_Time> option. 
I<Not yet implemented:>[ The resolution can be overriden by specifying
the B<step size>.]  I<Not yet implemented:> [ The time span of this data
is the same as for the graph by default, you can override this by
specifying the B<time range>. ]

If the resolution of the data is higher than the resolution of off
graph, the data will be further consolidated.  This may result in
a graph that spans slightly more time than requested.
Ideally each point in the graph should correspond with one B<CDP>
from an B<RRA>.  For instance, if your B<RRD> has an B<RRA> with
a resolution of 1800 seconds per B<CDP>, you should create an
image with width 400 and time span 400*1800 seconds (use appropriate
start and end times, such as C<--start end-8days8hours>).

Example: C<DEF:mydata=router.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE>

Example: C<DEF:januari=router.rrd:ds0:AVERAGE:start=20010101 end=20010201>

=head1 VDEF

B<VDEF>:I<vname>=I<RPN expression>

This command returns a value and/or a time according to the B<RPN>
statements used. The resulting I<vname> will, depending on the
functions used, have a value and a time component.  When you use
this I<vname> in another B<RPN> expression, you are effectively
inserting its value just as if you had put a number at that place.
The variable can also be used in the various graph and print
elements. I<Not yet implemented:> [ Everywhere you can insert a
number, you can also use the B<VDEF> (provided that it is set of course) ]

Example: C<VDEF:avg=mydata,AVERAGE>

=head1 CDEF

B<CDEF>:I<vname>=I<RPN expression>

This command creates a new set of data points (in memory only, not
in the B<RRD> file) out of one or more other data series. The B<RPN>
instructions are used to evaluate a mathematical function on each
data point. The resulting I<vname> can then be used further on in
the script, just as if it were generated by a B<DEF> instruction.

Example: C<CDEF:mydatabits=mydata,8,*>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<rrdgraph> gives an overview of how B<rrdtool graph> works.
L<rrdgraph_data> describes B<DEF>,B<CDEF> and B<VDEF> in detail,
L<rrdgraph_rpn> describes the B<RPN> language used in the B<?DEF> statements,
L<rrdgraph_graph> page describes all of the graph and print functions.

Make sure to read L<rrdgraph_examples> for tipsE<amp>tricks.

=head1 AUTHOR

Program by Tobias Oetiker E<lt>oetiker@ee.ethz.chE<gt>

This manual page by Alex van den Bogaerdt E<lt>alex@ergens.op.het.netE<gt>
